A lot is written about Elon Musk.
What did he say when you told him you
were going to write a book about your
experience? I got a thumbs-up emoji. A
thumbs-up emoji? That's like an
endorsement.
This week on Bold Names, we're talking
to John McNeill. He's the former
president of Tesla. He's got a new book
out called The Algorithm, and it's all
about the lessons he learned from
working closely with Elon Musk.
That's next.
John McNeill, welcome to Bold Names.
Thanks, Tim. Excited to have you here
today.
You're You've had a lot of big jobs, but
you're probably best known
for the time you served as president of
Tesla when the company brought out some
really big vehicles. The Model X SUV,
you worked to bring out the Model 3.
This was a game-changing vehicle. And
I'm just curious, what did you learn
about management from your time working
so closely with Elon Musk?
Man, how much time do you have? Like
I
>> This is one of those 4-hour podcasts.
[laughter] We're changing Bold Names.
There's so much
so much to unpack there, but so there
were no management playbooks for this,
no case studies. Like we literally were
making it up as we went. And 10Xing a
company at that scale
in hardware is is as it we all found out
super duper hard because it's not just a
matter of adding servers. We had to add
factories and supply chains and delivery
centers and service centers, like the
whole the whole shootin' match had to be
added. So,
we developed through a series of
mistakes we developed this algorithm
that we used
inside that's basically the operating
system of Tesla, and it weekly drives
both problem-solving and innovation so
that we could we could just run at a
pace that a company at that scale and in
that industry had never run in before.
Okay, I want to talk about the algorithm
cuz that's what your new book is about.
But first, let's just kind of get into
your mindset
as you joined the company because you
had not been a car executive. You're
right, you had been an entrepreneur. Up
until that point, you had started and
sold something like six startups before
joining Tesla.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I'm curious, you know,
how was that experience different from
what it was going to be like at Tesla?
You're you're you're going into a
company, you're working for Musk.
How is that different? I've been a CEO
of through those six companies, so I
hadn't like subordinated myself in a
long time. And uh and so I had to learn
to be a subordinate
and and that was
really in support of a CEO. And and so
all the times that I was asking teams to
do unreasonable things for me as a CEO,
the payback was almost sudden and
instant as I stepped into that job.
And I think you know, Musk hires
orthogonally in the sense that he
doesn't hire people from the industry
because he wants fresh thinking that is
not weighed down by
um by old constructs. The head of supply
chain came from Apple. The head of
uh
uh the head of battery cell innovation
uh was homegrown. He'd come up through
the ranks of Tesla having no experience
in automotive before. The head of
engineering came from uh Segway
and Apple. So,
it was a bunch of people who were hired
orthogonally, and I was sort of in that
same bunch. Uh and
and so I had to quickly learn
manufacturing at that scale in the
supply chain. But so the mentality I was
in was basically the same mentality I
was in as an entrepreneur, which is you
wake up every day, you've got a stack of
problems
that are begging for attention, and you
figure out which problem is the biggest,
and you pull that off the stack for that
day and try to solve it. Let's break
down
how you were
dealing with those problems or those
opportunities because that's really
what the book is about, what this
algorithm that kind of emerged from uh
Musk's kind of school of management is
all about. Tell me what the algorithm is
first. The algorithm is this
is this process that we use to drive
innovation and growth at Tesla.
And it was really arrived at It's a
five-step uh problem-solving device uh
that we use.
And then I write about three secrets
>> are What are those five steps? Yeah, so
it's
uh it is first of all, question every
requirement. Like when you're given a
set of requirements,
question the hell out of them. Are these
like a requirement of law, of safety, of
physics?
Uh of
And if you can't find a positive answer
to those three questions, then you
really start to rip out these
requirements cuz you make you make the
problem more simple. Uh and it's
important to simplify the problem so you
can actually scale it. The second step
is is to then radically simplify the
process.
And that is rip out every step that the
customer doesn't pay you for.
So, in our world, the customer doesn't
pay us for engineering change orders,
they don't pay us for documentation,
they don't pay us for
filling out finance forms. They don't
pay us for any of that. They pay us for
the car. So, you you essentially rip out
every step that the customer's not
paying you for. That's second step.
Third step is now that you've got a
simplified process, and this is going to
sound crazy from from a tech company,
but you trial that process manually.
You do not automate.
And the reason you don't automate is
because if you don't have the process
figured out, you're going to automate
something, and you're going to get to a
bad answer more quickly than you would
otherwise. Um or you're going to you're
going to take that bad process and
essentially cement it. Um because it's
really hard to change automation after
you start.
Once you get that process down, then you
speed it up, which shows all of its
flaws. That's the fourth step is add
speed.
And then the fifth step is you add uh
then automation last. Once you've got
this thing operating at speed, uh and
then it will scale and be repeatable.
I'm just curious, when was the first
time you heard this term the algorithm?
Did Musk make you get a tattoo? I mean,
where How did How did this get How did
this kind of fill its filter its way out
through the company?
Our weekly management team meeting was
essentially riffing on
lessons that we've learned or problems
that we were in the middle of.
And then we would try to we would try to
over time build frameworks for those.
And and we did a lot of reflection on
mistakes.
And and so this thing, this five-step
process, really didn't have a name
cuz we were we were kind of developing
it and learning it
and and then applying it ourselves.
And one day I forget who named it,
but somebody said,
"Hey, we ought to like call this
something
so that we can really communicate it to
everybody to the troops, everybody
involved." And uh and somebody came up
with, "Let's just call it the algorithm.
Like this is how things work here." Uh
and uh and so it stuck. So, no tattoos.
I don't have any I don't have any
permanent markings on my body, but I
probably have permanent scar tissue from
figuring this thing out by mistake. You
know, it's interesting, the first step,
question every requirement, really feels
like it comes out of kind of first
principles thinking. It does. And what
What is first principles thinking to
you? So, I'll give you an example.
And this is this is
really an an example of how we learned
the algorithm by mistake.
So, when we were trying to produce the
Model 3,
there was this separator between the
battery and um
and the it compartment of the car,
passenger compartment.
And the separator, we could not figure
out how to get this thing manufactured.
It would delaminate, misshape, all sorts
of stuff. We couldn't get it to lay flat
across the battery. And Elon was like
personally involved in this. So, we're
like in the manufacturing cell trying to
fix this.
And one day we look up and said, like,
"Who specked this thing? Like who said
we needed this?" This is like after 3
weeks of like sleeping in the factory
trying to fix this.
The people who were closest by were the
battery guys, and they said, "Oh, this
comes from the from the vehicle dynamics
team. They told us that we needed this
for sound deadening."
So, we go to the vehicle dynamics team,
we're like, "Why did you guys speck this
for sound deadening?" They said, "We
didn't.
This comes from the battery team. They
they specked this for
flame retardancy."
So, we go back to the battery guys,
we're like, "We were just with the
vehicle team. They told us they didn't
speck it. They said you guys did." They
said, "We didn't speck it."
We said, "Okay, what engineer's name is
on the speck?" Ooh.
So, we find the engineer's name.
>> guy? Yeah, like but this is part of the
process. You like question the
requirement first, and then you say
like, "Who Who Who thought this was
required?" Cuz maybe they have a good
reason. We should go talk to them.
We go try to find this particular
individual. We can't find them
because they were summer intern.
>> [laughter]
>> It wasn't even at the company anymore.
Tim, we had spent 3 weeks of our lives
in this manufacturing cell trying to fix
something that wasn't necessary.
And
it led us after several of these like
big incidents like this to say,
"We got to start every problem solve
with questioning the requirements and
finding out who
name of the person specked this so that
we could go talk to them and see if it's
really real or not." Which then gets to
the second delete every possible step.
Yeah, exactly. You know, on on one hand,
it's like this pretty simple of an idea,
like get rid of things you don't need.
Uh but how do you optimize a company
and its processes without cutting too
close to the bone where everything falls
apart, right? Well, I I think you could
argue we did that and we did that
systematically because in that in that
deletion process, we started to delete
things that we couldn't identify that
the customer would pay us for.
And oftentimes like Elon would say,
"Hey, I think unless we have to add back
10% of what we deleted, we probably
haven't gone far enough."
So, like we I would come in and say,
"Hey, like we deleted X, Y, and Z out of
this process." And he would come back
and say like,
"Have you added anything back yet?" And
I'd say, "No." And he'd say, "Okay, go
back and see what you else you can
delete."
And And so, oftentimes we would kind of
get close to the bone, maybe into the
bone, and then we'd pull back and say,
"Okay, like we've gone too far. Let's
take a step back." And then we'd pull
back. And so, it's almost like
failure
is kind of telling you how far you've
gone. Which I I think gets to this idea
of you don't want to automate until
you've run it a few times to make sure
it works, right? Exactly. Because what
automation does is it kind of puts
cement around that current process.
Because it's really hard to change
software and automation after you've
done it.
And when we were
experimenting on the factory floor, we
would literally tell the teams,
"Until we've really figured out how to
optimize this process, do not bolt the
machines to the floor."
Because once you do, they get really
hard to move. Well, and this this was
problematic
with the the rollout of the Model 3,
right? This was a huge issue. This is
where you learned some of these lessons,
right? Totally. This was where step five
came into play. Why? What happened? You
nailed it. Automate last was the big
learning from the first iteration of of
the Model 3 production. So, Elon was
talking about the alien dreadnought and
the machine that makes the machine. And
he had this goal of creating the most
automated factory
on the planet.
And part of the reason is is we had seen
the factories in China and we'd seen how
much more advanced they were than us and
in rest of the western manufacturers. We
said, "We got to like fix this." And
let's just take a step in here. Let's
put a little bit more color around this
period of time, right? The Model S, the
Model X, these are the vehicles that
Tesla had at that point. Really a niche
car maker at this point. An electric car
maker selling really high-end vehicles.
The Model 3 was going to be a game
changer.
More importantly, it was going to save
us from bankruptcy. Because we were
basically we were out of cash.
And so, a bet the company a bet the
company move. So, what we do is is we
start Model 3 by saying, "Let's Let's
create the best automated or the most
automated factory in the world." And to
do that, a dual a digital twin is
created, a SIM.
And the entire factory was simulated
digitally. Did they have a little
simulated Elon running around? They
didn't, but that's a pretty good
question. That would have been fun to
suggest actually.
But once the thing was built, like you
could see, "Oh my god, like practical
things have totally been overlooked."
Like the machines were so close together
Yeah. that a human being couldn't get in
between them to maintain them. Like the
maintenance guys couldn't get in there.
I remember going I remember touring it.
And it was like I felt like being in a
submarine where it was like going
through these narrow passages. It was
tight. Yeah, and and because of the
things broke all the time, you couldn't
fix them. The cars were falling off the
trays onto the floor. And it was
multiple levels in some of them. It was
a disaster. And we could not produce a
car on that line. In fact, that line
ended up being scrapped.
And
And so,
Jerome Guillen, who was an executive at
the company in charge trucks, and who
later become president. Yeah, he he took
my role after I left. And he he stepped
in and said,
"Guys, we have to go back to manual
process. Like we got to prove this
manually. So, I'm going to build a tent
over the weekend outside and we're going
to start to make manual 3s by hand." Or
Model 3s by hand. And
And that's where we learned this lesson
for the 10th time,
automate last.
But this was like this Model 3 line was
our biggest and most expensive mistake
ever. Almost killed the company. Like we
were literally down to the wire of
having nickels and dimes left in our
bank account before we got those Model
3s flowing out of the factory.
You know, it's it's interesting because
if if you talk to a traditional car guy
traditional car executive,
they probably would have said, "You
know, automation can be challenging,
right?" And
And I have talked to people over the
years and they probably said to Elon,
"Hey, this is a bad idea."
But it gets to I think it gets to some
of that corporate culture
that that you write about that if you
look at every no as a potential yes,
that sometimes
there's good reasons for that no. Yeah.
And I think culture has a lot to do with
it for sure.
You know, we were a bunch of software
people
essentially.
And so, we were
we were hell-bent on automating
everything cuz that's the answer
as you come from our background. So, we
even carry that some some of that in
which led to things like I just
described where you've got now an
over-automated factory cuz you got a
bunch of people that are super excited
about automation doing it. And so, I
think the problem can come from the yes
and the no in the sense that we were the
yes to this technology. And a
traditional car person may have been a
no or a caution.
And you can have both ends of that
equation battling progress.
Since you've left Tesla,
you're now on the GM board. So, you
still have a seat a front row seat at
kind of how the industry is evolving.
And since your days at Tesla, the
electric car market has just changed a
lot, right? It has been a little bit of
a roller coaster.
What's the current state of the EV
market here in the US?
This is one area technology where the
rest of the world is ahead of us.
I
both in terms of their supplier that
company's being able to supply it like
really unique. It's China like 20% of
the world and then the US which is not
letting China in at this point. Yeah,
it's like China and then I would say
Europe and North America probably on two
different trajectories right now.
And so,
when I got to when I was getting to know
Mary Barra and Mark Reuss at GM. Mary's
the CEO of GM and Mark is the president.
And extremely talented leaders. And the
one question I had was I wanted to
figure out how seriously they took
product.
Because I've just learned over time and
this is a mantra in Silicon Valley that
I think Steve Jobs helped to
solidify which is
compelling product wins. In fact, if you
have close to perfect product, you don't
even need a sales force cuz the world
beats a beats a path to your door.
And at a time we had that at Tesla. We
had zero advertising budget and yet
we're growing
you know, 10Xing.
And And so, I wanted to see like how
compelling the vehicles were in the
product plan at GM. And so, we went
vehicle by vehicle and I was like, "Oh
my gosh, these are super compelling EVs.
Like really compelling EVs." I got to
drive some of them.
And they had leapfrogged Tesla.
And
And those cars have come onto the market
and GM has gone from
zero to now the second ranked EV
manufacturer behind Tesla. Really
compelling cars. Like a $30,000
Bolt to $33,000 Equinox. Really cool
cars.
Up to like a Cadillac Escalade which has
every bell and whistle you can imagine
on a car.
And And so, I think the situation we
find ourselves in in the US is that we
have
administrations going
from one end of the one end of the
spectrum to the other. Sort of a 180 on
policy. EVs have become very political,
right? Whether it's the Democratic
administration trying to push everybody
into EVs or the current Republican
administration saying something
different. Something different. Exactly.
And so, then you got this base of users
that I think grows over time even in the
US even with policy that is negative
towards EVs. And so, we're certainly not
going to have 50% of the people driving
EVs I don't think by 2030 or 2035. But
it's going to happen over time because
it's just a superior product. You know,
it's interesting you have this very
interesting experience in the automotive
world. Yeah. Right. You have worked
for two of the biggest names of this
modern generation of cars. Mary and
Elon.
How do you compare them? I would say
you have two very talented engineers.
And
in Elon, you've got a visionary that
that
pursues super ambitious goals.
And
And Mary, I think you kind of have the
same thing. You've got this visionary
that said, "I see the car market moving.
We've got to get there. And so, I'm
going to move this 100 plus year old
organization towards that."
I think what I appreciate about working
with Mary is she is
hands down the best leader I've been
around.
And
her ability to number one attract talent
is world class. Sort of similar to Elon.
Her ability to get the most out of that
talent also world class. So, similar to
Elon.
But her ability to to exercise kindness
while she does it
is
very unique.
And
And she's somebody that like almost
everybody that meets her has a universal
reaction which is
I want to be on her team. Like I want to
support her.
Because she's so compelling and caring
and you can tell she's genuine.
And
And I so respect her leadership. And And
think in a lot of ways
she and Elon are both world class. But
in a lot of ways she's she's a little
bit the antithesis of Elon, too. She's
just a very compelling person in her own
right. Okay, so Tesla runs on this
operating system called the algorithm.
Yeah. Does the algorithm work without an
Elon Musk? It does. And that's why I
wanted to write this book. And the book
is told Each chapter of the book is told
through the eyes of frontline employees
who are deploying this framework daily
without supervision.
I got to say that that was one of the
things that I found very interesting in
this book is if you're a recruiter out
there, you're just given a road map of
some of the biggest talent of Tesla from
the last generation, Oh yeah, but it's
like there are there are
there are dozens and dozens and dozens
of these people, but
the the reason I told the story this way
is I wanted people to get
the notion that you do not have to be
Elon Musk to do this. You do not have to
be
um a CEO to do this. You can do this if
you're leading a small team. You can do
this if you're a team lead of 30 folks
on an in assembly line. Um if you're
running 20 folks in a
in delivery center. I these stories were
meant to say, "Hey, Elon gets a lot of
the gets almost all the press and the
accolades.
But here's the people that are that are
really doing incredible work in in
driving incredible breakthroughs.
And those are the stories I wanted to
tell. So, people got that notion that
you don't have to be Elon to do this. Uh
Walter Isaacson who wrote the biography
of Elon, he's telling more the story of
of Musk, but Right. There's this idea of
the great successes
>> of great breakthroughs that Musk has
had.
Uh
on the flip side of that there are these
demons that he is struggling with. And
the question is does he do what he does
is he successful
uh because of this other thing that's
kind of eating at him. I guess I'm I'm
wondering from your perspective
one of the things that Musk had, the
tools in his toolbox, was
he could motivate people through fear,
right? Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah, and and what I've discovered is
over time there are there are different
leadership styles and those leadership
styles can be really effective. Like the
fear leadership style can be effective.
And uh but what I've also discovered
over time is
you're totally uh inauthentic, a phony,
if you're trying to copy somebody else's
leadership style. So, I can't pull off
that leadership style. So, I had I had
to lead with my own leadership style
while working alongside Elon. Uh which
made us kind of freaking frac next to
each other. Uh and as it was as it times
probably pretty entertaining for people,
maybe uh um maybe frustrating at other
times, but
uh he does he does motivate at times
through fear, not all the time.
Um But at times through fear.
>> clarify that. I mean Yeah, exactly. But
but it's not always. Cuz people will
tell stories of of really being
impressed with his ability to get into
the details of really hard engineering
issues and just being inspired by what
he can do. Exactly. Or being in a
meeting I've never laughed so hard with
another executive like I've laughed with
Elon. Like he's so funny when he gets in
a mode of really riffing on through one
of these problems and then his sense of
humor kicks in. It's really fun to work
with him, but at times he he pulls on
that fear lever. I don't have that play
in my playbook. So,
I had to I had to discover my own
leadership style and that's another
message in this book is that
there are a myriad of leadership styles
at work. You got to run yours
as a leader. You cannot run somebody
else's and try to mimic it because it
just is inauthentic. Because you
ultimately your time ended at Tesla
because you write in the book you were
coming home angry. Your wife kind of
said, "Hey, this is changing you." Yeah.
How was it changing you?
I
we had a Christmas holiday where I was
finally getting a break uh
and I was with my family and my family
sat down and did sort of an intervention
on me which I was not expecting at the
at the holiday.
And they said, "You're becoming you're
becoming angry and mean."
And I got to say still chokes me up to
hear that cuz I that's the exact
opposite of how I want to be remembered
as a human. I don't want anybody
uh
thinking about their time working with
me or
or interacting with me as somebody who's
angry and mean. And
so I I literally went back in the first
week of January
and sat down with Elon and said, "Look,
I
here's what's here's what's happening to
me as part of this role.
It's time for me to go and I'll give you
months and months and months to
transition, but here's why it's time for
me to go."
A lot is written about Elon Musk.
What did he say when you told him you
were going to write a book about your
experience? I got a thumbs up emoji. A
thumbs [laughter] up emoji? That's like
an endorsement. Totally. Um
and it's it's largely because he I had
this kind of
tongue-in-cheek uh challenge with each
other. We I we love first principles
both of us. We love to be minimalists.
And so we we took this challenge on
between the two of us to run the company
with three sentences emails between the
back between the two of us. So, are
these run-on sentences that are like
Jack Kerouac style? No,
eventually we got down to characters.
Like how many characters were you
communicating? And uh and so his thumbs
up emoji was definitely in the spirit of
of our three sentences emails.
I totally knew that was an endorsement
for sure.
Well, John, this has been great. Thumbs
up and congratulations on the book.
Thanks, Tim.
>> [music]